In the previous lessons we've imported our Boston house price data set into our Jupiter notebook.
Now that we've successfully gathered our data it is time to take a good hard look at it.
And this is really the next step in our workflow.
We've formulated our question.
We've gathered our data.
Now it's time to explore our data set in depth.
And oftentimes we're going to be exploring visualizing and cleaning this data more or less at the same
time simply because the problems that the data has only becomes apparent after you start digging into
the data set okay.
So imagine that you're back at your real estate job and that the office intern has just plonked down
a big data set on your desk.
What are the first things that you'd want to understand about a fresh dataset.
What's a good starting point to get to grips with a data set that you've never seen before.
What are the kind of questions that you'd want to ask when you're first starting out with your work.
Let me show you my own starting point.
Let me show you the first six questions that I ask myself when I first start working with a new dataset
that I haven't seen before.
The first question I'm going to ask myself is Why does the data come from.
What's the source of the data.
The second question is can I find some sort of short description of what's in the data set.
And this is important for understanding the all important context under which the data was collected
and also how the data was collected.
Third how big is the data set actually.
How many individual data points are there in the data set.
Am I dealing with an enormous data set or a small one.
This is important from a practical point because working with a dataset with 10 million data points
will require very different techniques than working with a data set of say 10 data points.
For starters my aging laptop will totally struggle to crunch like a huge data set so it's important
to figure out what sort of beast you're gonna be dealing with.
But this aspect of data sets size it's not just important from a practical point of view but it's also
important from a theoretical perspective because many statistical tests that you're going to be using
will become a lot more powerful as the sample size increases the fourth question is how many features
are there in the dataset.
Now what I mean by features well for each data point how many aspects were measured how many entries
are there for each row in the table how many columns all the this is what I mean by features you and
I are going to be looking at house prices shortly.
And each house is gonna be in a row in this dataset.
The number of features will tell us how much information we have about each House the number of features
will help us figure out how many characteristics we're going to be basing our prediction of the house
value on the next two questions we're going to ask ourselves are what are the names of the features
and what are the descriptions of each feature.
The reason these questions are very crucial is because we need to understand what the dataset is actually
measuring.
So sometimes you'll get datasets with pretty unintuitive measurements so it's important to kind of dig
in and understand what exactly is contained in the data.
For starters you'll probably want to check the units that are being used in each column.
So for example is our price given in dollars or in thousands of dollars.
And these are just some of the basics to get right okay.
So now that we've got our To Do list let's return to the Python code and see if we can answer these
initial questions and check them off one by one.
There is a handy little python function called DIY R that we can use to look at a Python objects attributes.
Check it out Diaw parentheses Boston underscored dataset and shift enter.
Well bring up the following output.
They'll show us a list of attributes what we're looking at here is actually a list of attributes for
this python object the first attribute here is a shorthand for I'm guessing description.
So let's pull this out.
Let's print this out.
Once a print Boston on a school data sent dot D E S C are all caps and let's take a look at what we
see here.
So using this python attribute.
We do indeed get a description of this dataset.
This description was included in the python object if we were able to access it with this attribute
that we discovered through the desire.
Function OK so let's take a look at these notes.
We've already seen that there are five hundred and six instances or rows in this dataset and there are
13 attributes 13 categories or columns.
Now these 13 columns are as follows.
We've got per capita crime.
We've got concentration of nitric oxides so this is a proxy for pollution.
We've got the average number of rooms per dwelling.
We've got a pupil teacher ratio by town.
So this is a proxy for the quality of the schools and a whole bunch of other attributes.
Scrolling down a little more we see that the two researchers that collated this dataset are Harrison
and Rubenfeld and that this is based on a research paper.
In fact we can actually see the title of the original research paper here.
Hedonic prices and the demand for clean air and this was published in The Journal of environment economics
and management Vol. 5 in 1978.
So this already answers a lot of the initial questions about our dataset.
It's actually fairly interesting that the original purpose of the researchers was to figure out how
high the demand was for clean air in Boston.
That's what they were trying to accomplish.
They were trying to figure out how much more people are willing to pay to be able to breathe clean air
in the city.
The other thing that's important is that this housing data dates back to 1978 and we're working with
five hundred and six different entries so let's check off the questions on our list.
We've figured out the source of the data.
We've read a brief description of the data sent.
We've also managed to figure out the number of data points in the dataset which was five hundred and
six and the number of features which was 13.
And lucky for us the descriptions of the features was also given.
They call them attributes if you remember and the names of these attributes were given in all caps they
were abbreviations and finally we had a very brief description of all the features as well.
So I think for starters this is pretty good going.
But let's crack on how as an aside if you're curious on how this dataset was originally used you can
actually pull up the original research paper that is mentioned in the description.
So I just googled it and I got sent to the University of Michigan library Web site and then I was able
to pull up the PDA for the original paper for free.
And I think that's because Daniel Rubenfeld was actually at the University of Michigan while his co-author
David Harrison was at Harvard at the time.
Now if you Google this as well let me show you how you can embed a link in your Jupiter notebook very
very easily.
So I can copy the euro here.
Go back to my Jupiter notebook and then going into one of the markdown cells say the gathered data cell
I've got here I can use some square brackets and some parentheses to insert my your URL so the euro
goes between the two parentheses.
So I'm gonna paste it in here.
This is the euro that I copied from the other tab in my browser and then in the square brackets I can
include the text that I want to display instead of this long and unwieldy your.
So I want to write source original research paper and when I hit shift enter it's gonna be displayed
like so and this is an active link that we have now in our Jupiter notebook.
Now you might not always get a nice description along with your data set like this.
So let's have a think about how we might look at the number of data points and the number of features
manually in case it wasn't presented to us on a silver plate like this going down to the bottom.
I'm going to insert another markdown cell and when I had a subheading here and this is going to read
data points and features to look at the number of features in this dataset I'm going to first access
the bunch objects data attribute.
I remember seeing this up above.
When we use that the IRR function so we can write Boston underscore data set to hot data.
And this is what this would look like from the output we can see that it's an array and we could verify
this by writing type and then surrounding Boston on a score dataset dot data by parentheses.
And here we can see that it is in fact a name pi and dimensional array.
This is the type of object that we would be accessing like so now if we wanted to see the number of
rows and columns the easiest way to do this is by writing Boston on a score dataset set data dot shape
shape is an attribute of a number pi array.
If you recall so hitting shift into we can see that this array has 506 rows and 13 columns which is
good because it ties out we have the documentation that we read earlier.
The thing that you'll also notice in this line of Python code is that we are changing our attributes.
I'll just add this as a commentator on the right hand side.
Now this is something quite important to understand because this is a good example that shows how objects
and data can be nested inside one other scrolling to the very top.
We see that when we are working with the Boston underscored dataset we are in fact working with an object
of type bunch and this bunch has a number of attributes including that data attribute this data attribute
is in fact an object of type Endy array a num PI N dimensional array and the n dimensional array in
turn also has attributes including a shape attribute.
And when we call on an NDE arrays shape attribute we get back a tuple so when you see this dot notation
being used to chain things together you can think of it almost like a Russian material Suga doll where
each doll contains another object and if that's not your kind of thing then think of it maybe like the
movie Inception or you had dreams within dreams just with less gunfire and on that note I'll see you
on the next lesson.